# Formula Ordering

This document describes a method of ordering of formulas.
The purpose of this ordering is to provide a method of determining the 'complexity' of a formula.  
The ultimate purpose of such an ordering is to provide the basis for 
creating a globally confluent set of reduction rules for reducing proposition formulas.

One reason for imposing an ordering on formulas is so that there is one, and only one, 
'canonical' way to represent a given formula.
Such an ordering is a necessary condition for producing a confluent set of rules. 

Another reason for ordering formulas is 

## Formula Syntax

Formulas are represented in a textual form...
The normal form uses Polish notation and...
...the symbols 'T' and 'F' for TRUE and FALSE.
...the symbol '-' for the negation operator, followed by a formula. 
...the symbol '|' for the nand operator, followed by the antecedent and then the subsequent. 
...the symbol '*' for the implication operator, followed by the antecedent and then consequent. 
...by the symbol '.' followed by an integer number greater than 0 for representing variables.

Some examples of formulas...
F
T
*T.1
*-.1.3
-*.1.4
*.4**.1.3-*F.3



## Ordering


Here is the ordering...
1) formulas that are shorter are less complex than longer formulas. 
2) formulas that are the same length are ordered by the complexity of thier antecedent.
	That is, formulas with less complex antecendents come before those with more complex antecedents
3) formulas that are the same length and have the same antecedent are ordered by the complexity of thier subsequent.
4) otherwise, formulas are ordered lexically using the following symbol order:
	- F
	- T
	- variables
	- negation
	- nand
	- implication
5) Finally, any formula, A, where N is the highest numbered variable in A, 
	comes before any formula F where the highest numbered variable in F is greater than N.
This rule makes it possible to assign numbers to formulas in finite models (aka real life models).
Without this rule it would be impossible to assign numbers to formulas other than variables, 
because there'd be infinite number of variables.

The order of the above rules must be respected.

Examples..
Rule 1: .2 comes before *.2T 
Rule 2: *T.1 comes before *.1.1 
Rule 3: |F.1 comes before |F.2
Rule 4: *.2|1.3 comes before *.2*1.3 
Rule 5: |.1.2 comes before .3

	
# Enumerating Formulas
F
T
|FF   rule: |FF->T
|FT	  rule: |FT->T
|TF   rule: |TF->T
|TT   rule: |TT->F 
.1
|F.1	rule: |F.1->T
|T.1
|.1|T.1 rule: |.1|T.1 -> T
.2
|T.2
|.1.2

